

             Embed Inc Email Transport and Queueing System

This document describes the overall structure of the Embed Inc email
transport and queueing system and provides pointers to the other
documentation files on specific aspects of the system.


                       Email Transport Background

Email is transmitted from one machine to another using the SMTP (Simple
Mail Transfer Protocol) standard.  Once the email arrives on the "last"
machine, it is generally put into a queue for each end user.  The end user
retrieves the mail from the queue using a mailer program (like Eudora or
Microsoft Outlook Express, for example).  The mailer communicates with a
server on the machine where the email is queued using the POP3 (Post
Office Protocol 3) standard.  The mailer sends outgoing email via SMTP.

The Embed Inc email system includes SMTP and POP3 servers, and a system
for queueing and routing email destined for end users via POP3, and remote
systems via SMTP.  See the SMTP and POP3 documentation files for details
on these programs.  The Embed Inc email system also includes a program
called MAILCHECK that can transfer all email to/from a remote system.  It
can work with a dedicated LAN or WAN connection or a dialup.  See the
MAILCHECK documentation file for details.


                            Queue Structure

All the email queues and associated control files are in the Embed Inc
SMTPQ directory.  This directory is directly within the Embed Inc software
installation directory.  The default installation directory on PC systems
is c:\embedinc.  In that case the email queue directory is
c:\embedinc\smtpq.  Note that this may be a symbolic link pointing to
another directory.  Use the Embed Inc L command to list the installation
directory to see whether SMTPQ is a symbolic link, and if so, where it is
pointing.


Technical details of email queues

  This section can be skipped by end users.  It may be useful background
  information for system administrators that are trying to diagnose
  problems.

  Within the SMTPQ directory are subdirectories for individually named
  queues.  The subdirectory names are the queue names.  It is intended
  that there be one queue for each remote system or means of passing along
  mail.  For example, the queue for passing mail to system
  "mailer.bestnet.com" via SMTP might be called "bestnet".  There might
  also be a queue called "sendmail" for mail waiting to be passed to the
  local sendmail program.

  The SMTPQ directory and each queue directory within it may contain an
  OPTIONS file.  These contain control information about the email system
  and individual queues.  OPTIONS files are described in detail later in
  this document.

  Files within each queue have special naming conventions.  A queue may
  contain a file called "options".  This file is identical in function and
  syntax to the top level OPTIONS file, except that it applies only to
  that queue.  Commands in local queue OPTIONS files override settings
  from the top level OPTIONS file in case of conflict.

  Individual mail message entries within a queue are identified by control
  files.  The names of these files always start with "c", followed by a
  number.  Valid control files have non-zero length.  A control file with
  zero length is the same as a non-existent control file.  Control files
  are used as interlocks between asynchronous processes.  All other files
  for the same queue entry start with a different letter, followed by the
  same number as in the control file name.

  The addresses list file name starts with "a".  This file contains each
  mail destination address on a separate line.

  The mail message file name starts with "m".  This is a text file that
  simply contains the mail message itself.

  All file names not explicitly mentioned are reserved.  In other words,
  it is not permissible to leave "junk" files in an SMTP queue.

  To provide interlock between processes, the C file must be opened for
  read and write the entire time any other files for that queue entry are
  created, written, read, deleted, or otherwise accessed.  When a C file
  can't be opened when trying to create an entry, a different sequence
  number is used.  When trying to read a queue entry, it should be
  considered non-existant on any of the following conditions:

    1) The control file doesn't exist, or it can't be opened for read and
       write.

    2) The control file is found to have zero length after it was opened.

    3) Any of the queue entry mandatory files (like the A and M files) are
       not found.


OPTIONS files description

  There may be a file called "options" in the top level queue directory,
  and within each queue.  If so, these files contain a set of commands.
  The first keyword on each line is a command name. Subsequent fields, if
  any, are parameters specific to that command. The valid OPTIONS file
  commands are listed below.

  All OPTIONS file keywords are case-insensitive.  Commands and parameters
  are separated by one or more spaces.  Leading and trailing spaces are
  ignored.  Blank lines, or lines containing only spaces are ignored.  If
  any command parameter contains spaces, the parameter must be enclosed in
  quotes (") or apostrophies (').

  The OPTIONS file commands are:

    * <comment>

      Any line where the first non-blank characters is "*", is totally
      ignored.

    LOCALSYS <local system name>

      Sets the local system name as it should be viewed from outside. This
      should be a fully qualified machine and domain name.  For example,
      use "ODIN.VALHALLA.ORG" instead of just "ODIN".  This command is
      typically put in the top level OPTIONS file.

    RECVDOM domain ... domain

      Provides the list of domains to unconditionally accept mail for.
      This is intended to be the domains this server is responsible for
      receiving mail for.  Mail messages to any address within these
      domains will be accepted without the sender having to authenticate.
      Accepting mail for other domains is assumed to be a relay action,
      which is only done for authenticated users.  The list of domain
      names must be separated by spaces.  Each domain name must be fully
      qualified and inlude the top level domain, like "acme.com".  The
      domain names are case-insensitive.

    REMOTESYS <remote system name>

      Sets the remote system name in whatever form is necessary to reach
      it from the local machine.  This command is typically put in the
      OPTIONS file for each queue, since each queue usually holds mail
      destined for a particular system.  The default remote system name is
      the generic queue name.

      If REMOTESYS is explicitly set to the empty string (""), then SMTP
      transfer from this mail queue is inhibited.

      If REMOTESYS is set to the special string "--MX--", then MX lookups
      will be done on recipient addresses to determine the remote systems
      on the fly.  When MX lookups are used, other values should be set as
      follows:

        REMOTEUSER ""
        REMOTEPSWD ""
        BOUNCEFROM <some reasonable address>

    REMOTEUSER username

      Specifies the user name required to access the remote server. It is
      assumed that no user name is required when USERNAME is empty. The
      default is an empty user name.

    REMOTEPSWD password

      Specifies the password required to access the remote server. It is
      assumed that no password is required when PASSWORD is empty. The
      default is an empty password.

    REM_RESP <remote system name>

      Name of remote system as reported by that system.  The default is
      the REMOTESYS value, above.  Note the distinction between REMOTESYS
      and REM_RESP.  The REMOTESYS name is the name of the remote system
      from the local system's point of view.  The REM_RESP is the name
      reported by the remote system itself.

    SENDMAIL

      Send all mail to the SENDMAIL program on the local machine. The
      default is to send mail via the SMTP protocol.  This switch is
      generally set for the incoming mail queue.  The SENDMAIL program
      runs locally and decides how an email message is to be delivered,
      then does it.  Incoming email messages are generally "delivered" by
      storing them in a queue for a particular user.  The MAIL.ADR
      environment file set describes how email addresses are delivered.
      See the MAIL_ADR documentation file for details.

    INQ <generic queue name>

      Set the mail queue into which to place any incoming mail. This may
      be just a default overidden by the user for programs that use this
      feature.  Typically, incoming mail is placed into a queue with
      SENDMAIL enabled.  This causes incoming messages to be delivered via
      various mailer scripts, depending on the target email address.  See
      the MAIL_ADR documentation file for a description.

    PORT <server port ID on remote system>

      Indicates the port number of the server on the remote machine.
      Setting this value to zero, or omitting the parameter after the PORT
      command indicates to use a default.  Note that the standard SMTP
      server port is 25.  This is not something you should mess with
      unless you've got an unusual setup and know excatly what you are
      doing.

    SMTP_CMD <command name>

      Sets the system command to use to run the SMTP program.  SMTP_CMD is
      neccessary when the SMTP command is not in the command search path,
      or you want to unambigously run a particular version.  The default
      is "smtp" in the Embed Inc "com" directory.

    AUTOSEND <ON or OFF>

      When a program finishes putting mail into a queue, it will attempt
      to send everything in that queue when AUTOSEND is ON. The mail will
      be sent from a separate process excuting the command

        smtp -client -outq <queue name>

      where <queue name> is replaced by the generic name of the queue from
      which the mail is to be sent.  The command "smtp" is replaced by
      whatever is set with the SMTP_CMD command.  The default is AUTOSEND
      OFF.

    POP3 <ON or OFF>

      Enable/disable the POP3 (Post Office Protocol version 3, RFC 1725)
      server on this queue.  The POP3 server always denies access for any
      queue where POP3 is set to OFF.  When POP3 is set to ON, it is
      strongly recommended that a PASSWORD command also be used. The
      default is POP3 OFF.

    USERPUT <ON or OFF>

      Indicate whether a local client must authenticate themselves to
      relay mail thru this system to external addresses.  Remote clients
      not from an unroutable IP address must always authenticate
      themselves unless sending mail to an internal address.  Mail for
      internal addresses are always accepted whether from authenticated
      clients or not.

    PSWDGET password

      Sets the password required for remote clients to receive mail from
      this queue.  Not all programs necessarily make use of this. The POP3
      server will deny access unless all of these conditions are met:

        1)   The POP3 user name matches a generic queue name.

        2)   POP3 is enabled for that queue, see POP3 command, above.

        3)   The POP3 password matches this password.

      This password can also be set with the PASSWORD command, below. The
      default password is the empty string.

    PSWDPUT password

      Sets the password required for remote clients to send mail to this
      system.  The empty string disables password validation, thereby
      preventing clients from authenticating themselves.

      To authenticate itself, a client must provide a suitable user name
      and password.  The user names are the directory names within the
      SMTPQ directory.  A password specified in a queue directory
      therefore only applies to the user name of that queue directory
      name.

      This password can also be set with the PASSWORD command, below. The
      default password is the empty string.

    PASSWORD password

      Sets all passwords.  This is done globally if this command appears
      in the top level OPTIONS file, or just for a specific queue when it
      appears in the OPTIONS file for that queue. Individual passwords can
      be set by the PSWDGET and PSWDPUT commands.  The default password is
      the empty string.

    BOUNCEFROM address

      Sets the FROM: email address for automatically generated bounce
      messages.  The default bounce FROM: address is autoreply@localsys,
      where LOCALSYS is the value supplied by the LOCALSYS command
      (ABOVE).

      If BOUNCEFROM or LOCALSYS are set to the empty string (""), then no
      bounce messages will be generated.

  Commands in an OPTIONS file in a particular queue override the commands
  in the OPTIONS file at the top level (directly in the SMTPQ directory).
  An OPTIONS file within a particular queue only applies to that queue.
