                         Embed Inc Program SMTP
                           Updated 5 June 2011


smtp <options>

Perform SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol).  This program can perform
several roles, depending on the command line options.

The command line options are:

  -SERVER

       Act as an SMTP server.  The program will wait for connections from
       clients on remote machines.  This is the default.

  -CLIENT

       Act as an SMTP client.  The program will connect to a server on a
       remote machine.  The default is -SERVER.

  -ENQUEUE

       Add an entry to the input mail queue.  The input mail queue can be
       selected with the -INQ command line option.  -ENQUEUE requires that
       specific target addresses be supplied.  This can be accomplished
       with the -TO or -ADRFILE command line options. The default is
       -SERVER.

  -OUTQ <queue name>

       Indicates a specific mail queue to send mail from.  An outgoing
       mail queue name is required for the program to send mail.  The mail
       queue name is the subdirectory name within the Embed Inc directory
       SMTPQ.  Each specific queue only handles mail destined for one
       remote system.  The remote system name is stored in the queue, and
       therefore is implied when the queue name is given.

       By default in client mode, the program attempts to send all mail
       from all queues.

  -INQ <queue name>

       Indicates specific incoming mail queue to use.  A default may be
       specified in the mail queue OPTIONS file.

  -ADRFILE <adressess list file name>

       Specifies mail target address by giving the name of an addresses
       list file.  Each line in the file must be one target address. The
       -ADRFILE command line option adds to the target address list.  The
       default target address list is empty.

  -MSG <mail message file name>

       Indicate a file containing a mail message.  This may be used, for
       example, with the -ENQUEUE command line option.  The default is no
       mail message file is known.

  -MUTE

       Disable status and debug messages as much as possible.  This is
       equivalent to -DEBUG 0.  The default is -DEBUG 5, see below.

  -DEBUG level

       Set the level of status and debug messages.  0 disables all
       optional messages.  The maximum level is 10.  The default is 0.

  -PORT port

       Sets the TCP port number to establish the SMTP server on.  This is
       only relevant in server mode.  The default is 25, which is the
       standard SMTP port.

  -ANYPORT

       Allow the server to establish itself on any internet port.  The
       default is to terminate with an error in server mode if unable to
       become a server on the desired port (see -PORT option, above).

  -1

       Allow only one client at a time in client mode.  By default, each
       client is processed concurrently in a separate thread.  The -1
       option also prevents multiple threads from being created. The
       single client is processed in the main (and only) thread. This
       command line option is intended for debugging.

  -TO <target adr1> ... <target adrN>

       Specifies an explicit list of mail target addresses.  All remaining
       tokens after the "-TO" command line option are interpreted as
       target addresses.  Therefore, -TO is always the last command line
       option.  The -TO command line option adds to the target address
       list.  The default target address list is empty.
